          8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---8<---
          8<---8<        :: HTMLSPLIT ::               8<---

htmlsplit is a program to split your way too large HTML files into
pieces that are actually readable. If you ever wanted to cut down this
large HTML manual that is not available in smaller pieces and uses so
much bandwith when retrieved, then this program is for you.

htmlsplit’s main task is splitting up HTML files at headings, but it
is not limited to that. By default, it splits up at all “h1” tags it
finds in the file, but you can customise it to use any XPath query you
like so that even broken files that do not use the HTML h* tags for
content separation can be split by this tool.

htmlsplit can also add navigation links to the bottom of the split
pages, and create a Table of Contents (ToC) file containing links to
all h* elements in the files it split up.

It can also do some more things, check the manual page
(doc/man/htmlsplit.1 in the source tree) for details.

	     8<---8<---8<--- Dependencies ---8<---8<---8<

htmlsplit is a C program that has exactly one external dependency,
“libxml2” (see <http://www.xmlsoft.org/>), which has to be available
on your system.

htmlsplit requires a POSIX-compliant system for compilation. Each
Linux should fulfill this requirement, as well as BSD and OSX,
although I have not tested them. On Windows, you probably need to
recur to POSIX emulation layers such as Cygwin. I will accept patches
to make htmlsplit compile on MinGW, though, if they do not require too
much Windows-specific code. You might want to ask me before you start
working on this.

	     8<---8<---8<--- Compilation ---8<---8<---8<

In order to build htmlsplit, you need a C compiler, the libxml2
library including any development headers if your distribution splits
this up, and the cmake program (see <http://www.cmake.org>) which is
used to manage the build system.

In order to build it, issue the following commands in the source tree:

    $ mkdir build
    $ cd build
    $ cmake ..
    $ make
    $ [sudo] make install

By default, this will install the “htmlsplit” executable into
/usr/local/bin. If this is not what you want, execute the “cmake” step
above like this:

    $ cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/opt/htmlsplit

Replace “/opt/htmlsplit” with the desired target directory. The
“htmlsplit” executable will be placed in a subdirectory “bin/” below
that directory.

              8<---8<---8<--- Repository ---8<---8<---8<

The project website including source code repository and bugtracker is
hosted at the following URL:

            http://devel.guelkerdev.de/projects/htmlsplit

The canonical repository is available for cloning via Git:

         $ git clone git://devel.guelkerdev.de/htmlsplit.git

A GitHub mirror is available:

		 https://github.com/Quintus/htmlsplit

        8<---8<---8<--- Bugs and Pull Requests ---8<---8<---8<

For submitting bug reports, please email me at
<m-guelker@guelkerdev.de> or file a bug report at the project page
linked to above. The same goes for any pull requests, but please note
that I will not accept contributions for making this software compile
on proprietary compilers such as MSVC.

	       8<---8<---8<--- License ---8<---8<---8<

htmlsplit splits up large HTML files into smaller HTML files.
Copyright © 2015 Marvin Gülker

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
